README.md, before:

# HUGR

The DataMesh service that provides access to various data sources through common GraphQL API.

The Hugr is built on the top of [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org) and uses it as an calculation engine. The Hugr can work with following data sources:

- PostgreSQL (incl. with extensions: PostGIS, TimescaleDB)
- DuckDB files
- HTTP REST API (support OpenAPI v3)
- All file formats and data sources that supported by DuckDB (CSV, Parquet, JSON, ESRI Shape, etc.)

Files can be stored in the local file system or in the cloud storage (currently support only s3 cloud storage, in plan: Azure, GCS, AWS, R2).

MySQL, SQLLite, Clickhouse will be supported in the future.

## Executable

There are 3 executables provided in the repository:

- cmd/server/main.go - main executable for the Hugr server,
- cmd/migrate/main.go - executable for the core-db migrations,
- cmd/management/main.go - executable for the cluster management node.

In the cluster the core-db should be PostgreSQL, in the other nodes it can be DuckDB file or PostgreSQL.

The executable is built with Go and can be run on any platform that supports Go. The executable is built with the following command:

```bash
CG_ENABLED=1 go build -tags='duckdb_arrow' -o hugr cmd/server/main.go
```

## Dependencies

The Hugr uses the [Hugr query engine package](https://github.com/hugr-lab/query-engine).

## Deployment

The common way to deploy the Hugr is to use Docker. The Docker image provided by repository [docker](https://hub.docker.com/r/hugr-lab/docker). There are two images provided:

- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/server - simple hugr server,
- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/automigrate - simple hugr server with automigration for the core-db schema.
- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/cluster_management - hugr management node for the cluster mode.

## Environment variables for the server

### General

- BIND - string, that defines network interface and port, default: :15000
- ADMIN_UI - flag to enable AdminUI, for path /admin ([GraphiQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql)), default: true
- ADMIN_UI_FETCH_PATH - path to fetch AdminUI, default: "/admin"
- DEBUG - flag to run in debug mode (SQL queries will output to the stdout), default: false
- ALLOW_PARALLEL - flag to allow run queries in parallel, default: true
- MAX_PARALLEL_QUERIES - limit to numbers of parallels queries executed, default: 0 (unlimited)
- MAX_DEPTH - maximal depth of GraphQL types hierarchy, default: 7

### DuckDB engine settings

- DB_PATH - path to management db file, if empty in memory storage is used, default: ""
- DB_MAX_OPEN_CONNS - maximal number of open connections to the database, default: 0 (unlimited)
- DB_MAX_IDLE_CONNS - maximal number of idle connections to the database, default: 0 (unlimited)
- DB_ALLOWED_DIRECTORIES - comma separated list of allowed directories for the database, default: "", example: "/data,/tmp"
- DB_ALLOWED_PATHS - comma separated list of allowed paths for the database, default: "", example: "/data/.local,/tmp/.local"
- DB_ENABLE_LOGGING - flag to enable logging, default: false
- DB_MAX_MEMORY - maximal memory limit for the database, default: 80% of the system memory
- DB_MAX_TEMP_DIRECTORY_SIZE - maximal size of the temporary directory, default: 80% of the system memory
- DB_TEMP_DIRECTORY - path to the temporary directory, default: ".tmp"
- DB_WORKER_THREADS - number of worker threads, default: 0 (number of CPU cores)
- DB_PG_CONNECTION_LIMIT - maximal number of connections to the database, default: 64
- DB_PG_PAGES_PER_TASK - number of pages per task, default: 1000

### Cluster settings

- CLUSTER_SECRET - secret key for the cluster, default: "", example: "secret". It is used to secure the cluster communication.
- CLUSTER_MANAGEMENT_URL - URL of the cluster management node, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:14000"```. It is used to connect to the cluster management node.
- CLUSTER_NODE_NAME - name of the node, default: "", example: "node1". It is used to identify the node in the cluster.
- CLUSTER_NODE_URL - URL of the node, by that the management node can connect to the node though Hugr IPC protocol, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:15000/ipc"```. It is used to connect to the node.
- CLUSTER_TIMEOUT - timeout to communicate with the cluster management node, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the cluster communication.

### CoreDB settings

The core-db is used to store the metadata for the data sources and to manage the access to the data sources.
The core-db  stores data sources, catalog sources, roles and role permissions, and other metadata.
It can be a DuckDB file, in-memory storage or PostgreSQL. Core-db based on the PostgreSQL is used for the cluster mode (to make all replicas on the same page).
The DuckDB file can placed in the local file system or in the cloud storage (currently support only s3 cloud storage, in plan: Azure, GCS, AWS, R2), in that case path should be s3://bucket/path/to/file.duckdb.

- CORE_DB_PATH - path to core-db file or PostgreSQL DSN, if empty in memory storage is used, default: ""
- CORE_DB_READONLY - flag to open core-db in read-only mode, default: false
- CORE_DB_S3_ENDPOINT - s3 endpoint, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_REGION - s3 region, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_KEY - s3 access key, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_SECRET - s3 secret key, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_USE_SSL - flag to use SSL for s3, default: false

### CORS

- CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS - comma separated list of allowed origins for CORS, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:3000,http://localhost:3001"```
- CORS_ALLOWED_METHODS - comma separated list of allowed methods for CORS, default: "GET,POST,PUT,DELETE,OPTIONS"
- CORS_ALLOWED_HEADERS - comma separated list of allowed headers for CORS, default: ""Content-Type,Authorization,x-api-key,Accept,Content-Length,Accept-Encoding,X-CSRF-Token"

### Authentication and authorization

- ALLOWED_ANONYMOUS - flag to allow anonymous access, default: true
- ALLOWED_MANAGED_API_KEYS - flag to allow managed API keys (though GraphQL API), default: false
- ANONYMOUS_ROLE - role for anonymous user, default: "anonymous"
- SECRET_KEY - api key that used for authentication, default: ""
- AUTH_CONFIG_FILE - path to the file with authentication config, default: ""

The format of the config file is described in the [auth.md](auth.md) file. The config file can be in JSON or YAML format. The config file is used to configure authentication and authorization for the server.

### Cache

There are two types of cache: L1 and L2. L1 cache is in-memory cache (using [bigcache](https://github.com/allegro/bigcache)), L2 cache is external cache (Redis, Memcached). The L1 cache is used for the most frequently used data, while the L2 cache is used for less frequently used data.

- CACHE_TTL - time to live for cache, default: 0
- CACHE_L1_ENABLED - enabled L1 cache, default: false
- CACHE_L1_MAX_SIZE - memory limit for L1 cache in MB
- CACHE_L1_CLEAN_TIME - memory cleaning interval
- CACHE_L1_EVICTION_TIME - eviction from the L1 cache interval
- CACHE_L1_MAX_ITEM_SIZE - max size of the item in L1 cache
- CACHE_L1_SHARDS - number of shards in L1 cache
- CACHE_L2_ENABLED - enabled L2 cache, default: false
- CACHE_L2_BACKEND - L2 cache backend, can be "redis" or "memcached"
- CACHE_L2_ADDRESSES - addresses of L2 cache servers, comma separated list, default: ""
- CACHE_L2_DATABASE - database name for L2 cache (use for redis only)
- CACHE_L2_USERNAME - username for L2 cache (use for redis only)
- CACHE_L2_PASSWORD - password for L2 cache (use for redis only)

## Environment variables for the management node

### General cluster settings

- BIND - string, that defines network interface and port, default: :14000
- CLUSTER_SECRET - secret key for the cluster, default: "", example: "secret". It is used to secure the cluster communication.
- TIMEOUT - timeout to communicate with the cluster nodes, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the cluster communication, default: 30s.
- CHECK - interval to check the cluster nodes, default: 1m, example: "5s". It is used to set the interval for the cluster communication.

### OIDC integration settings

- OIDC_ISSUER - OIDC issuer URL, default: "", example: ```"https://example.com"```
- OIDC_CLIENT_ID - OIDC client ID, default: "", example: "client_id"
- OIDC_CLIENT_TIMEOUT - OIDC client timeout, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the OIDC client.
- OIDC_TLS_INSECURE - flag to disable TLS verification, default: false
- OIDC_COOKIE_NAME - OIDC cookie name, default: "", example: "hugr_oidc"
- OIDC_SCOPE_ROLE_PREFIX - OIDC scope role prefix, default: "", example: "hugr:"
- OIDC_USERNAME_CLAIM - OIDC username claim, default: "name", example: "name"
- OIDC_USERID_CLAIM - OIDC user ID claim, default: "sub", example: "sub"
- OIDC_ROLE_CLAIM - OIDC role claim, default: "x-hugr-role", example: "x-hugr-role"

### Common node settings

The following settings will be advertised to the cluster nodes:

In general:

- ADMIN_UI - flag to enable AdminUI, for path /admin (GraphiQL), default: true
- ADMIN_UI_FETCH_PATH - path to fetch AdminUI, default: "/admin"
- DEBUG - flag to run in debug mode (SQL queries will output to the stdout), default: false

CORS:

- CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS - comma separated list of allowed origins for CORS, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:3000,http://localhost:3001"```
- CORS_ALLOWED_METHODS - comma separated list of allowed methods for CORS, default: "GET,POST,PUT,DELETE,OPTIONS"
- CORS_ALLOWED_HEADERS - comma separated list of allowed headers for CORS, default: ""Content-Type,Authorization,x-api-key,Accept,Content-Length,Accept-Encoding,X-CSRF-Token"

CoreDB:

- CORE_DB_PATH - path to core-db PostgreSQL DSN, in the cluster mode it should be PostgreSQL, default: ""

Auth:

- ALLOWED_ANONYMOUS - flag to allow anonymous access, default: false
- ANONYMOUS_ROLE - role for anonymous user, default: ""
- ALLOWED_MANAGED_API_KEYS - flag to allow managed API keys (though GraphQL API), default: false
- AUTH_CONFIG_FILE - path to the file with authentication config, default: ""

## CoreDB migrations

For some reason it can be needed to run migrations for the core db. It makes manually by the special tool - migrate that provided in this repository (cmd/migrate). The following command run migrations:

```bash
CG_ENABLED=1 go build -tags='duckdb_arrow' -o migrate cmd/migrate/main.go

./migrate -path /migrations -core-db core-db.duckdb
```

Commit message:

feat: add DB_HOME_DIRECTORY to configuration and update node with cluster info

README.md, after:

# HUGR

The DataMesh service that provides access to various data sources through common GraphQL API.

The Hugr is built on the top of [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org) and uses it as an calculation engine. The Hugr can work with following data sources:

- PostgreSQL (incl. with extensions: PostGIS, TimescaleDB)
- DuckDB files
- HTTP REST API (support OpenAPI v3)
- All file formats and data sources that supported by DuckDB (CSV, Parquet, JSON, ESRI Shape, etc.)

Files can be stored in the local file system or in the cloud storage (currently support only s3 cloud storage, in plan: Azure, GCS, AWS, R2).

MySQL, SQLLite, Clickhouse will be supported in the future.

## Executable

There are 3 executables provided in the repository:

- cmd/server/main.go - main executable for the Hugr server,
- cmd/migrate/main.go - executable for the core-db migrations,
- cmd/management/main.go - executable for the cluster management node.

In the cluster the core-db should be PostgreSQL, in the other nodes it can be DuckDB file or PostgreSQL.

The executable is built with Go and can be run on any platform that supports Go. The executable is built with the following command:

```bash
CG_ENABLED=1 go build -tags='duckdb_arrow' -o hugr cmd/server/main.go
```

## Dependencies

The Hugr uses the [Hugr query engine package](https://github.com/hugr-lab/query-engine).

## Deployment

The common way to deploy the Hugr is to use Docker. The Docker image provided by repository [docker](https://hub.docker.com/r/hugr-lab/docker). There are two images provided:

- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/server - simple hugr server,
- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/automigrate - simple hugr server with automigration for the core-db schema.
- ghcr.io/hugr-lab/cluster_management - hugr management node for the cluster mode.

## Environment variables for the server

### General

- BIND - string, that defines network interface and port, default: :15000
- ADMIN_UI - flag to enable AdminUI, for path /admin ([GraphiQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql)), default: true
- ADMIN_UI_FETCH_PATH - path to fetch AdminUI, default: "/admin"
- DEBUG - flag to run in debug mode (SQL queries will output to the stdout), default: false
- ALLOW_PARALLEL - flag to allow run queries in parallel, default: true
- MAX_PARALLEL_QUERIES - limit to numbers of parallels queries executed, default: 0 (unlimited)
- MAX_DEPTH - maximal depth of GraphQL types hierarchy, default: 7

### DuckDB engine settings

- DB_HOME_DIRECTORY - path to the DuckDB home directory, default: "", example: "/data/.hugr". This very important to make persistence secrets (like S3 credentials) in container environments.
- DB_PATH - path to management db file, if empty in memory storage is used, default: ""
- DB_MAX_OPEN_CONNS - maximal number of open connections to the database, default: 0 (unlimited)
- DB_MAX_IDLE_CONNS - maximal number of idle connections to the database, default: 0 (unlimited)
- DB_ALLOWED_DIRECTORIES - comma separated list of allowed directories for the database, default: "", example: "/data,/tmp"
- DB_ALLOWED_PATHS - comma separated list of allowed paths for the database, default: "", example: "/data/.local,/tmp/.local"
- DB_ENABLE_LOGGING - flag to enable logging, default: false
- DB_MAX_MEMORY - maximal memory limit for the database, default: 80% of the system memory
- DB_MAX_TEMP_DIRECTORY_SIZE - maximal size of the temporary directory, default: 80% of the system memory
- DB_TEMP_DIRECTORY - path to the temporary directory, default: ".tmp"
- DB_WORKER_THREADS - number of worker threads, default: 0 (number of CPU cores)
- DB_PG_CONNECTION_LIMIT - maximal number of connections to the database, default: 64
- DB_PG_PAGES_PER_TASK - number of pages per task, default: 1000

### Cluster settings

- CLUSTER_SECRET - secret key for the cluster, default: "", example: "secret". It is used to secure the cluster communication.
- CLUSTER_MANAGEMENT_URL - URL of the cluster management node, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:14000"```. It is used to connect to the cluster management node.
- CLUSTER_NODE_NAME - name of the node, default: "", example: "node1". It is used to identify the node in the cluster.
- CLUSTER_NODE_URL - URL of the node, by that the management node can connect to the node though Hugr IPC protocol, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:15000/ipc"```. It is used to connect to the node.
- CLUSTER_TIMEOUT - timeout to communicate with the cluster management node, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the cluster communication.

### CoreDB settings

The core-db is used to store the metadata for the data sources and to manage the access to the data sources.
The core-db  stores data sources, catalog sources, roles and role permissions, and other metadata.
It can be a DuckDB file, in-memory storage or PostgreSQL. Core-db based on the PostgreSQL is used for the cluster mode (to make all replicas on the same page).
The DuckDB file can placed in the local file system or in the cloud storage (currently support only s3 cloud storage, in plan: Azure, GCS, AWS, R2), in that case path should be s3://bucket/path/to/file.duckdb.

- CORE_DB_PATH - path to core-db file or PostgreSQL DSN, if empty in memory storage is used, default: ""
- CORE_DB_READONLY - flag to open core-db in read-only mode, default: false
- CORE_DB_S3_ENDPOINT - s3 endpoint, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_REGION - s3 region, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_KEY - s3 access key, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_SECRET - s3 secret key, default: ""
- CORE_DB_S3_USE_SSL - flag to use SSL for s3, default: false

### CORS

- CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS - comma separated list of allowed origins for CORS, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:3000,http://localhost:3001"```
- CORS_ALLOWED_METHODS - comma separated list of allowed methods for CORS, default: "GET,POST,PUT,DELETE,OPTIONS"
- CORS_ALLOWED_HEADERS - comma separated list of allowed headers for CORS, default: ""Content-Type,Authorization,x-api-key,Accept,Content-Length,Accept-Encoding,X-CSRF-Token"

### Authentication and authorization

- ALLOWED_ANONYMOUS - flag to allow anonymous access, default: true
- ALLOWED_MANAGED_API_KEYS - flag to allow managed API keys (though GraphQL API), default: false
- ANONYMOUS_ROLE - role for anonymous user, default: "anonymous"
- SECRET_KEY - api key that used for authentication, default: ""
- AUTH_CONFIG_FILE - path to the file with authentication config, default: ""

The format of the config file is described in the [auth.md](auth.md) file. The config file can be in JSON or YAML format. The config file is used to configure authentication and authorization for the server.

### Cache

There are two types of cache: L1 and L2. L1 cache is in-memory cache (using [bigcache](https://github.com/allegro/bigcache)), L2 cache is external cache (Redis, Memcached). The L1 cache is used for the most frequently used data, while the L2 cache is used for less frequently used data.

- CACHE_TTL - time to live for cache, default: 0
- CACHE_L1_ENABLED - enabled L1 cache, default: false
- CACHE_L1_MAX_SIZE - memory limit for L1 cache in MB
- CACHE_L1_CLEAN_TIME - memory cleaning interval
- CACHE_L1_EVICTION_TIME - eviction from the L1 cache interval
- CACHE_L1_MAX_ITEM_SIZE - max size of the item in L1 cache
- CACHE_L1_SHARDS - number of shards in L1 cache
- CACHE_L2_ENABLED - enabled L2 cache, default: false
- CACHE_L2_BACKEND - L2 cache backend, can be "redis" or "memcached"
- CACHE_L2_ADDRESSES - addresses of L2 cache servers, comma separated list, default: ""
- CACHE_L2_DATABASE - database name for L2 cache (use for redis only)
- CACHE_L2_USERNAME - username for L2 cache (use for redis only)
- CACHE_L2_PASSWORD - password for L2 cache (use for redis only)

## Environment variables for the management node

### General cluster settings

- BIND - string, that defines network interface and port, default: :14000
- CLUSTER_SECRET - secret key for the cluster, default: "", example: "secret". It is used to secure the cluster communication.
- TIMEOUT - timeout to communicate with the cluster nodes, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the cluster communication, default: 30s.
- CHECK - interval to check the cluster nodes, default: 1m, example: "5s". It is used to set the interval for the cluster communication.

### OIDC integration settings

- OIDC_ISSUER - OIDC issuer URL, default: "", example: ```"https://example.com"```
- OIDC_CLIENT_ID - OIDC client ID, default: "", example: "client_id"
- OIDC_CLIENT_TIMEOUT - OIDC client timeout, default: 5s, example: "5s". It is used to set the timeout for the OIDC client.
- OIDC_TLS_INSECURE - flag to disable TLS verification, default: false
- OIDC_COOKIE_NAME - OIDC cookie name, default: "", example: "hugr_oidc"
- OIDC_SCOPE_ROLE_PREFIX - OIDC scope role prefix, default: "", example: "hugr:"
- OIDC_USERNAME_CLAIM - OIDC username claim, default: "name", example: "name"
- OIDC_USERID_CLAIM - OIDC user ID claim, default: "sub", example: "sub"
- OIDC_ROLE_CLAIM - OIDC role claim, default: "x-hugr-role", example: "x-hugr-role"

### Common node settings

The following settings will be advertised to the cluster nodes:

In general:

- ADMIN_UI - flag to enable AdminUI, for path /admin (GraphiQL), default: true
- ADMIN_UI_FETCH_PATH - path to fetch AdminUI, default: "/admin"
- DEBUG - flag to run in debug mode (SQL queries will output to the stdout), default: false

CORS:

- CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS - comma separated list of allowed origins for CORS, default: "", example: ```"http://localhost:3000,http://localhost:3001"```
- CORS_ALLOWED_METHODS - comma separated list of allowed methods for CORS, default: "GET,POST,PUT,DELETE,OPTIONS"
- CORS_ALLOWED_HEADERS - comma separated list of allowed headers for CORS, default: ""Content-Type,Authorization,x-api-key,Accept,Content-Length,Accept-Encoding,X-CSRF-Token"

CoreDB:

- CORE_DB_PATH - path to core-db PostgreSQL DSN, in the cluster mode it should be PostgreSQL, default: ""

Auth:

- ALLOWED_ANONYMOUS - flag to allow anonymous access, default: false
- ANONYMOUS_ROLE - role for anonymous user, default: ""
- ALLOWED_MANAGED_API_KEYS - flag to allow managed API keys (though GraphQL API), default: false
- AUTH_CONFIG_FILE - path to the file with authentication config, default: ""

## CoreDB migrations

For some reason it can be needed to run migrations for the core db. It makes manually by the special tool - migrate that provided in this repository (cmd/migrate). The following command run migrations:

```bash
CG_ENABLED=1 go build -tags='duckdb_arrow' -o migrate cmd/migrate/main.go

./migrate -path /migrations -core-db core-db.duckdb
```
